A philosophy of teaching Java
as a first teaching language
by Judith M Bishop
Computer Science Department
University of Pretoria
Pretoria
0002
jbishop@cs.up.ac.za
The way to teach Java as a first programming language is still uncharted. Those of
us who have gone through a change of first programming language more than
once know that the one guiding beacon is not to assume that the pattern of
teaching a new language will follow that of the old. Java is no exception to this
rule.
Two possible approaches
Java is different to its predecessor first languages (Pascal, C++, Ada) in the
following ways:
1. It is small, yet object-oriented.
2. It has no built-in data structure types other than the array, but gives
access directly to classes which implement a rich variety of data
structures.
3. It provides for full graphical user interface and multimedia (sound image
and animation) facilities, and promotes GUI programs as applets
associated with web browsers.
4. It provides built-in concurrency features and facilitates programming on
the network.
Given this list there seem to be two possible approaches to presenting Java as a
first teaching language. The first is immediately attractive: start at point 3; go
straight into GUI, multimedia, applets and the whole network environment,
thereby catching the students’ interest and showing them how modern and
different Java really is. The second approach is to start at the beginning, laying a
sound foundation of basic concepts, and then moving on to the newer aspects.
My answer to the dilemma, embodied in the textbook Java Gently, does
some of both, as they both have advantages. Starting with applets and GUI is
exciting, but requires so much underlying knowledge of objects that even if
students learn the outer shell of programs parrot-fashion, they may never fully
understand what they are doing. On the other hand, proceeding at a steady pace
Preface 2
through all the background first is a sound policy, but can be both boring and
overwhelming.
A gentle but powerful approach
The approach I have devised is a middle ground, which hinges on Java’s two main
selling points: it is network-enabled but it is small and safe. So we start off with
programs which show how the web is used, but then move straight into covering
the basic concepts. Because Java has a smaller number of constructs than Pascal
or C++, we can spend less time here, and therefore can get back to the GUI and
network aspects sooner, certainly within the first half of a course. Then applets,
multimedia, graphics and so on can be introduced properly, to students who have
already encountered classes, objects, instantiation and inheritance, and know how
to handle them.
Approach is not everything, however, and I favour the use of three other
tried and tested teaching techniques:
• diagrams everywhere,
• explanation by example,
• self-check quizzes and problems after every chapter.
There are three kinds of diagrams one can use
• algorithm diagrams which show the flow of small programs, and also
serve to illustrate new concepts such as exceptions and multithreading;
• class diagrams which show the structure of the program at the class
level, while still revealing the basic components such as methods and
variables and the interaction between them;
• form diagrams which show the syntax of each new Java construct in a
way which mirrors its usage in practice.
Each example should be carefully chosen so that it both illustrates the feature
which has just been introduced, and also solves a real problem in the best possible
Java style. Examples should also have a ‘real world’ flavour, wich reinforces the
need for a programmer to understand the user’s problem, and to write programs in
a user-friendly way. As soon as a new feature is introduced, it becomes part of the
repertoire of the programmer, and can re-emerge in subsequent examples when
needed. As the student matures, the examples can get longer and more
challenging.
Teaching programming vs teaching Java
For a first year course, it is no longer sufficient to just teach a language. The
expectation of today’s computer users is that the whole computing milieu will
assist in the solution of day-to-day problems. In addition to explaining syntax and
the construction of a well-formed program, a programming course of the 1990s
has to include techniques for problem solving.
Preface 3
I start every worked problem with a typically inexact statement. This is
then refined in the process of devising a solution. Where applicable, the
appropriate technique is selected from those previously discussed, and then we
proceed to algorithm development. As an additional aid, algorithms are illustrated
with structured diagrams, and important techniques are discussed, highlighted, and
identified for reuse later on. The important programming paradigms of:
• structured programming,
• object-oriented programming,
• class design,
• abstraction,
• software reuse, and
• generality
all receive attention, and examples are carefully chosen to show how these
techniques can encourage correctness and efficiency. For example, there are
discussions on guidlines for class design, on the relationship between arrays and
classes, on the interplay between loops and exceptions, and on the different ways
of implementing data structures, to mention just a few.
Order of topics
The order of topics is a thorny issue. I favour a grouping which enables an easy
introduction to programming right at the beginning. The order of statements as
covered is: output, assignment, for, input, if, while, do, switch. This grouping does
not follow that of the Java reference manual, nor of a course intended for someone
who already knows programming. It is a pedagogically tried and tested order,
which gets the novice student through the fundamentals of Java, gently, but
without undue delay and fuss.
In addition, teaching proceeds with an even mix of program, control, and
data structure issues, plus some Java specialities. My experience has shown that
this integrated approach to the order of topics has tremendous benefits for
motivation and understanding, and that students are able to get ahead and
accomplish more in a shorter time, without compromising their assimilation of the
principles of Java and programming. The key points of the order of all the material
are:
• Rapid entry to genuine programming problems;
• The power of object-oriented programming presented with realistic
examples from the start;
• Exceptions introduced early on and explained as a natural way to
control flow between classes;
• “No fuss” discussion of features that are simple in Java (such as class
structure) but in-depth treatment of potentially difficult topics (such as
coercion and cloning);
Preface 4
• Hash tables grouped with arrays to show their efficacy in providing for
non-integer indices;
• A custom-made input package which is used from chapter 4, and
explained in full in chapter 6 once strings tokenisers have been covered;
• Introduction to object references and their implications through the
development of a linked list class;
• Almost full coverage of the awt facilities, but geared towards examples;
• Applets presented through a viewer and a browser, and the differences
between applets and applications explained once the student can
genuinely appreciate the issues;
• Multithreading done before socket programming, so that the socket
programs can illustrate multiple client-server operations.
Conclusion
Java is here to stay. In North America and Europe it is taling over as fisrt teaching
language at a rapid rate. Whether one joins in and switches to Java is not at issue
here, but if one does, then the above comments should throw light on how to do
it.
The final paper will include references and examples.